This problem was quite the journey. Especially in C++

I'm not gonna lie, my first attempt, was manually trying to solve the problem. I thought I saw a solution and went for it. Sadly, it wasn't right. So I started writing code. As I was thinking about what to write, I knew recursion/dynamic programming could be the answers to my problem. Because essentially, at each stage, I have a number of options for what step to take. And the solution will be the cheapest of (taking each step + the minimum energy to solve the rest of it). So, I started breaking the problem down. Algorithmically, there were two big steps at each stage. First check and move any pods that are already in the hallway to their rooms, if they can move. Then see which pods can move out of the room and into which positions. The base cases of the recursion were: the room is solved, or the room is stuck and no pods can move.

After all the logic for the "move hallway pods" and "get all possible steps" at each stage was written, it was just a matter of calling them recursively on the burrow configuration and add up the energy taken. A couple small bugs later (have to step through the recursion to debug, which is always fun), I had my answer. Though, funnily enough, I actually went back to manually solving the problem and this time did get the answer. My code matched it

Two big optimizations I did that sped thing up considerably. The bigger one was memoization. I was keeping track of which burrow configurations I had seen and saving their optimal energy, to be reused later. The smaller one was checking and moving hallway pods often, as this would reduce the number of overall possible steps at each stage.

Then came part two. Something that never happens, the puzzle input changed. I was trying to make things as flexible as possible given the input. However, I was not expecting the number of pods per room to change. So I did some refactoring and supported, not only a variable number of pods per room, but even variable number of room and hallway lengths and all. The whole thing is now completely flexible. At the end, I was pretty happy with my results. It even gave me the answer, first try without any debugging.